The Brookings Institution is one of many think tanks in Washington, D.C., where scholars and bureaucrats sit in quiet offices and wait by the phone. They write op-eds and books, give talks and convene seminars, hoping that, when reputations falter or Administrations shift, they will be rescued from the life of opining and contemplation and return to the adrenaline rush and consequence of government. Nearly always, the yearning is to be inside. Strobe Talbott, who became the president of Brookings in 2002, served in Bill Clinton’s Administration as his leading Russia expert, and he was rumored to be on the shortlist for Hillary Clinton’s Secretary of State. Others, too, may have expected a call. But, after Donald Trump was elected, only one prominent Brookings stalwart was summoned, and her story became emblematic of all those in Washington who entered the Administration full of trepidation but hoping to be a “normalizing” influence on a distinctly abnormal President.

Fiona Hill, a leading expert on Russia and its modern leadership, had a reputation as a blunt speaker and an independent thinker and analyst. The daughter of a miner and a midwife, she grew up in Bishop Auckland, in northern England, and has a strong northern accent. She described herself to me as “politically engaged but antipartisan.” She has a distaste for the kind of ideological standoff that she observed in the eighties between Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and the president of the National Union of Mineworkers, Arthur Scargill, which was, as she put it, “a clash of titans with regular people smashed in between.”

Hill, who was born in 1965, is a senior fellow at Brookings, and a denizen of the Eurasia Foundation, the Council on Foreign Relations, and Harvard University, where she got her doctorate in history. She was a national intelligence officer in the Administrations of George W. Bush and Barack Obama. In 2013, she and Clifford Gaddy, an economic specialist at Brookings, published “Mr. Putin: Operative in the Kremlin,” which traces Vladimir Putin’s path from his hardscrabble upbringing in Leningrad to his years in the government. She was wary of Obama’s efforts to downplay Russia’s importance in the world—he called the country a “regional power”—convinced that doing so only provoked Putin to assert himself more forcefully. In an updated edition of the book, published in 2015, Hill and Gaddy described Putin as “arguably the most powerful individual in the world.” Hill’s friend Nina Khrushcheva, the granddaughter of the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, said that Putin was “secretly flattered” by the portrayal.

In June, 2016, it emerged that Russia’s military intelligence agency, the G.R.U., had penetrated the Democratic National Committee’s computer servers and begun spreading derogatory information about Hillary Clinton and the Democrats. Many of Hill’s colleagues were disturbed that Trump had praised Putin as a “strong leader” and took seriously the growing speculation that the Trump campaign was colluding with the Russians to sway the election. Hill was skeptical of this theory, thinking it more likely that the campaign and Russia were working in parallel to discredit Clinton. She was less certain than her colleagues that Clinton would win the election, especially after the outcome of the Brexit referendum, that same month. Several of her family members had voted to leave the E.U., and in Bishop Auckland sixty-one per cent were in favor. She saw why Trump appealed to voters who felt that their concerns had long been ignored.

After Trump’s victory, the mood at Brookings was funereal. But, as Hill told K. T. McFarland, a former speechwriter in the Reagan Administration, on her FoxNews.com show, on November 15th, the President-elect’s overtures to Putin presented an opportunity: “Trump has certainly laid the ground for saying, ‘O.K., I’m going to give you a chance to explain yourself.’ ” After the interview, Hill joked that Trump might appoint McFarland to be his national-security adviser. Two days later, Trump named Michael Flynn to that post, and, the following week, chose McFarland to be his deputy.

In one of more than two dozen conversations that I had with Hill this spring, she told me that she had not been seeking a position in the new Administration, but that she was “open to advising whoever came along and offering my two cents’ worth.” McFarland called Hill on the afternoon of December 29, 2016, asking what she thought about the sanctions that the Obama Administration had just imposed on Russia in retaliation for Putin’s election interference. Hill urged McFarland to avoid thinking about them as a “political issue”; they were, she said, simply “the appropriate action.”

Earlier that month, Trump had rejected the C.I.A.’s assessment that Russia had sought to help his campaign. “They have no idea if it’s Russia or China or somebody,” he told Fox News. “It could be somebody sitting in bed someplace. I mean, they have no idea.” Hill respected the analysts who evaluated Russia’s activities, and she was alarmed by Trump’s denigration of their work. She was also troubled when, in January, 2017, she learned about a dossier, compiled by the former British spy Christopher Steele, that was circulating among journalists and experts in D.C. Hill had known Steele since 2006, when she was an intelligence officer and he worked for M.I.6, Britain’s foreign-intelligence service. Steele had been hired by Fusion G.P.S., a small American investigative firm that initially worked on behalf of a conservative client and later the Clinton campaign, to gather reports about Trump’s ties to Russia. One of Steele’s more salacious findings alleged that the Russians had a sex tape that would compromise Trump. The level of detail made Hill suspect that Steele’s sources had slipped him bits of misinformation to discredit the rest of his research. The dossier, she felt, would “pour gasoline on a raging fire.” BuzzFeed published the documents, and Trump denounced them as a fabrication by “sick people.”

Hill told McFarland about her relationship with Steele, and conveyed her doubts about the dossier. On January 25th, David Cattler, the deputy assistant to the President for regional affairs, called Hill to tell her that Flynn was offering her the position of senior director for European and Russian affairs on the National Security Council. Unsure whether to take the job, she sought Strobe Talbott’s advice. Talbott was a tough Trump critic, but he told her she should do it—she would be “one of the adults in the room.” Graham Allison, Hill’s mentor at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, also approved. “You’ve spent your whole life on this, and if things go very badly with the U.S.-Russia relationship, it could be catastrophic for everybody,” he said. The next day, she accepted the job offer, telling Cattler, with whom she had worked on the National Intelligence Council, in the two-thousands, that she felt “more comfortable” knowing that he would be at the White House.

Two weeks later, Trump dismissed Flynn, after it was reported that, in January, he had lied to Mike Pence, the incoming Vice-President, about a phone call he’d had with the Russian Ambassador to the U.S., Sergey Kislyak. Obama Administration officials believed that the call had undermined their efforts to hold Russia accountable and to deter future election meddling, but McFarland assured Hill that nothing improper had occurred. (Transcripts of several calls between Flynn and Kislyak that were released in May made it clear that Hill’s advice to show a united front with Obama’s Administration had been ignored.)

In February, 2017, Hill attended a dinner hosted by Eliot Cohen, a professor of strategic studies at Johns Hopkins University and an early leader of the conservative “Never Trump” movement. On January 29th, Cohen had published a piece in The Atlantic warning “friends still thinking of serving as political appointees in this administration” that, as he put it, “when you sell your soul to the Devil, he prefers to collect his purchase on the installment plan.” Working for a xenophobic and divisive government, he argued, gave that government legitimacy. At the dinner, he told Hill that she was putting her reputation in jeopardy by working for Trump. Hill had read Cohen’s article, and she told me that she considered it a “powerful warning.” Still, she said, “because of strange quirks of fate, I was the one they asked to step into the fray. What was I going to do? Walk away?”

There were early signs that it might have been wise to do so. On February 28th, Cattler called Hill to tell her that his job had been eliminated. Hill said he warned her, “ ‘Look, you could come in and do the job as you see fit, and succeed. You could come in and be miserable but still feel like you’re making a difference. But you could also come in and be fired. You could be fired capriciously.’ ”

Old acquaintances also pressured Hill to change her mind. On March 8th, before Hill was scheduled to meet with her staff for the first time, she had breakfast with Celeste Wallander, at the Blue Duck Tavern, near Georgetown. Wallander had worked as Obama’s White House adviser on Russia, and she and Hill had crossed paths for more than twenty years. There was clear evidence that Trump and members of his circle had coördinated with the Russians, Wallander said. Trump’s recent attack on nato as being “obsolete” showed that he intended to do whatever Putin wanted. To work in the Trump Administration was to endorse its policies. “You can’t pick and choose,” Wallander said. “You can’t say, ‘Well, I didn’t support that.’ You own those policies, even if you, on the inside, disagreed with them.” Hill wasn’t persuaded, telling Wallander that the Administration still needed advisers with “no illusions” about Putin to defend against future Russian election meddling. “When your house is on fire, you’ve got to go in and save something,” she said.

Hill’s decision to join the Trump White House was, echoing Samuel Johnson’s assessment of second marriages, a “triumph of hope over experience.” Her detractors called it a triumph of ambition over wisdom. Even Hill’s closest colleagues told me that her stubbornness could work against her. She acknowledged that many of Cohen’s and Wallander’s warnings proved well founded. Little was done to address the threat of future election meddling, and Hill’s tenure was, in many ways, an extended exercise in futility. Ultimately, she will be remembered not for safeguarding the country but for the unvarnished testimony that she delivered in the impeachment proceedings against Trump, in October and November of 2019, which revealed how U.S. foreign policy was subverted for domestic political purposes. In her conversations with me, she offered a unique look at the dysfunction, the misogyny, and the corruption that have proliferated in Trump’s White House. She remained convinced that public service was a necessary and noble calling, but worried that partisan politics was hobbling the country and endangering its security. “We’re doing this to ourselves now,” she said. “The Russians don’t have to do a thing.”

Hill sees her willingness to take on undesirable jobs as part of a family tradition. Her maternal grandfather, an air-raid warden during the Second World War, used buckets of sand to put out flares dropped by German advance planes. Her father, Alfred, a miner since he was fourteen, lost his job in 1963, when a pit closed in Crook, and went to work as a porter in a hospital.

Hill’s parents had little money, but they encouraged her and her younger sister, Angela, to take part in European exchange programs. Hill excelled at languages, and by the time she was fifteen she was fluent in French and proficient in German. Like many teen-agers, the Hill girls had nightmares about being caught in a nuclear war between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R.; Hill wryly told me that on walks around Bishop Auckland she would look out for places to hide in the event of an atomic blast. Their father’s cousin Charlie Crabtree told them stories about his adventures sailing across the Arctic in convoys delivering supplies to the Soviet Union during the war. “Charlie couldn’t understand how we’d gone from being wartime allies to being enemies with the Soviet Union,” Hill recalled. “He kept on saying, ‘You’re good at languages, Fiona. You should study Russian and figure out what’s gone wrong.’ ”

Fiona was self-deprecating, awkward, and intelligent. The girls attended Bishop Barrington, a local school in a rough neighborhood. Angela, now an English teacher in Madrid, said that in school Fiona was bullied, sometimes physically: people called her “posh—even though she wasn’t posh—because she had different aspirations.” In 1983, Fiona’s final year of secondary school, she was chosen as head girl, and her teachers encouraged her to apply to Oxford. Interviewing at Hertford College, wearing an outfit her mother had made, she noticed the other girls in the waiting room whispering about her. One of them tripped her as she stood up and she fell into a doorframe. Hill recalled, “So I’m going into the interview while holding my nose, which is bleeding.” The professor conducting the interview told Hill that she would not be able to take Russian at Hertford, because she had not studied it in secondary school. He suggested that she apply instead to St. Andrews, in Scotland. Hill followed the advice and was admitted. In the summer before she began, she took a job as a cleaner at the hospital where her father worked. One day, a macerator—a machine that blended human waste and disposable bedpans—exploded. Some of her friends’ mothers worked at the hospital, too. Hill told me, “They were all, like, ‘You’re at university, eh? You too posh now to get shit off walls?’ And I was, like, ‘No. I can go do that.’ ”

At the end of her third year of university, Hill won a British government fellowship to study at the Maurice Thorez Institute, a language school in Moscow, before returning to St. Andrews. It was an era of shortages, and the general gloom in Moscow reminded her of the atmosphere in Roddymoor, the former coal-mining town where her grandparents had lived. Toward the end of her year abroad, Hill got a job as an assistant for NBC in Moscow, during Ronald Reagan’s historic summit with Mikhail Gorbachev. There, she met the political scientist Robert Legvold, who suggested that she study in the United States. The following year, Hill applied for a Kennedy Scholarship at Harvard, to pursue her interest in U.S.-Soviet relations. At her interview, the judges had trouble understanding her accent, and, as she was leaving, she opened a door and stepped into a closet. She didn’t get the scholarship. A few weeks later, she interviewed for and was awarded a Frank Knox fellowship, and in the fall of 1989 she enrolled in a master’s program in Soviet studies at Harvard’s Russian Research Center. Soon, she met a Soviet-studies student from Chicago named Kenneth Keen. They became friends and struck up a romance.

In the summer of 1991, Hill took a part-time job as a Russian translator at Graham Allison’s Strengthening Democratic Institutions Project, which aimed to transform the Soviet Union, and, later, Russia, into a Western-style democracy. “We were trying to do something bold,” Allison told me. “Maybe, if you were criticizing it, you’d say romantic.” Hill arrived for her interview wearing a pair of ripped jeans and Doc Martens boots. Allison said, “Fiona was certainly, at best, a diamond in the rough, and there was a lot of rough. And her accent—it was like listening to one of those BBC radio shows where the people were speaking Scottish and you couldn’t figure out what the hell they were talking about.”
In 1993, Allison took a leave of absence from Harvard to serve as an Assistant Secretary of Defense in the Clinton Administration, and he asked Hill to run his project. She liked organizing conferences that brought together political, economic, and academic leaders from across Europe and the former Soviet Union. The next year, she had a professional breakthrough when a paper she had co-authored, about Russia’s intimidation of its neighbors, was praised in the Times. In 1995, Hill married Keen, and they became tutors in Cabot House, one of Harvard’s undergraduate dorms.

Three years later, Hill completed her doctorate. She and Keen moved into a small two-bedroom house in suburban D.C. Keen worked as a business consultant; Hill got a job at the Eurasia Foundation. Horton Beebe-Center, the foundation’s then vice-president, described Hill as a “prolific networker” with “extraordinary connections in Europe, right up to heads of state.”

Hill believed at the time that Russia’s aggressive behavior had to be harshly condemned. When Russia launched its second war in Chechnya, in 1999, she told the Christian Science Monitor that the conflict “could produce a whole slew of Osama bin Ladens.” In 2000, she went to work at the Brookings Institution. Exploring the prospect of reconciliation between Moscow and the Chechens, she spent time with prominent Chechen separatists, whom she had gotten to know in the nineties and who were wanted by the Russian intelligence services. Some of Hill’s counterparts in Russia and Chechnya, she said, “were telling me, ‘Look, you’re a nice girl, Fiona, but you need to back off on this. This is getting dangerous.’ ” She soon came to understand what they meant. In September, 2002, while attending a conference in Sochi, Hill became violently ill after taking a sip of a drink at her hotel bar. An analysis of her blood showed that her liver enzymes were elevated, and she concluded that she had been poisoned.

On September 1, 2004, Chechen rebels demanding the withdrawal of Russian forces from Chechnya took hostage more than a thousand people, mostly children, at a school in Beslan, a town in the Russian republic of North Ossetia. Two days later, Russian commandos attempted to free the hostages in what was widely viewed as a botched raid, and at least three hundred and thirty people were killed in the chaos. On September 6th, Hill encountered Putin for the first time, at a private tea that he hosted at his residence near Moscow to mark the inaugural meeting of the Valdai Discussion Club, a forum on Russia’s role in the world. The attendees had assumed that, given the disaster in Beslan, the conversation at the tea would be brief. Instead, Putin spent nearly four hours sparring with them. He said that the West had to stop criticizing him for the war in Chechnya without proposing any realistic solutions to address the demands of the region’s separatists. Hill was impressed by his political agility and command of the issues.

A few days later, Hill wrote an Op-Ed in the Times, which was published under the title “Stop Blaming Putin and Start Helping Him.” She described Putin’s event as “remarkable,” saying, “We have to show we are listening,” and proposed that the U.S. share intelligence with Russia to assist in its investigation of the Beslan attack. Some of Hill’s colleagues said that she was falling for Putin’s propaganda. “I got awful shit,” she said. “Some people accused me of being paid to write this by the Russians.” But Angela Stent, the national intelligence officer for Russia and Eurasia on the National Intelligence Council, who had also attended the private event with Putin, saw her proposal as “a sound suggestion.” In 2006, Stent recommended that Hill replace her at the N.I.C. Hill took the job—she was three months pregnant—and swiftly established a reputation for her unbiased assessments. As Daniel Hoffman, one of her C.I.A. counterparts, put it, she “simply looks at the facts and makes her conclusions.”

In November, 2009, Hill returned to Brookings and began to work with Clifford Gaddy on their book about Putin. In 2014, after protesters drove out Ukraine’s pro-Russian President, Viktor Yanukovych, Putin ordered the annexation of Crimea and initiated a military campaign to control eastern Ukraine. Russia experts in the U.S. disagreed about how to respond. Strobe Talbott published an op-ed in the Washington Post with Steven Pifer, another colleague at Brookings, championing a proposal to provide material assistance to the Ukrainian military, including armor-piercing missiles. A week later, Hill and Gaddy responded in the Post, warning that such an action could “push Putin into a regional war.” Obama’s top White House advisers shared their caution, and decided against providing the missiles, known as Javelins, to the Ukrainians. But, as the 2016 Presidential election approached, the situation was becoming increasingly volatile, and candidates in both parties advocated tougher action against Putin’s aggression. Hill told me, “It felt to me like the eighties again, when we were in a war scare.”

Hill’s first day in the Trump White House, April 3, 2017, did not begin well. Her ten-year-old daughter woke up in the middle of the night with a stomach bug. Rushing to a CVS to get some medicine, Hill slammed the door of her Mini Cooper into her face. At around 7 a.m., with a bruise swelling around her right eye, Hill ran out of the house in her sneakers, forgetting to take the dress shoes she’d set aside.

Her boss was H. R. McMaster, an Army general, who had replaced Flynn as national-security adviser. Hill was in her White House orientation session when an aide to McMaster interrupted to tell her that she needed to go to the Oval Office immediately to brief Trump for a call to Putin. An explosion that morning, evidently from a bomb planted by a terrorist, had ripped through a subway car in St. Petersburg. Ten people were reported dead. Hill and McMaster took chairs across from the Resolute Desk, where Trump was seated. McMaster introduced Hill by title but not by name, and asked her to offer some insight. Hill recalled, “I thought to myself, Keep it simple.” She told Trump that, since St. Petersburg was Putin’s home town, the terrorist incident was likely to be “very personal” to him. In the middle of the briefing, Ivanka Trump walked in, impeccably dressed, and sat down next to Hill, who tried to hide her sneakers under her chair.

Its a lowflying carpet for running errands.
“It’s a low-flying carpet, for running errands.”
Cartoon by Victoria Roberts
Brookings had said that Hill’s job there would be kept open for three months in the event that she quit or was fired. Hill brought a box of family pictures and other personal effects to her new office, and kept the box under her desk. She always carried a green notebook and two pens, taking notes at all her meetings. McMaster sometimes told her, “Don’t just take notes—take note of what’s going on,” but she didn’t always follow his advice.

On May 2nd, Trump spoke on the phone with Putin about the conflict in Syria, where Russian forces were supporting the Assad regime and American forces were fighting Islamic State terrorists. Trump and Putin spoke through interpreters, and senior members of the White House staff gathered in the Oval Office to listen on speakerphone. McMaster and Secretary of State Rex Tillerson had the seats closest to the President’s desk. Margaret Peterlin, Tillerson’s chief of staff, stood to one side, and Ivanka and her husband, Jared Kushner, sat on a sofa. Hill, who had a migraine, found a perch at the back of the room. Doubting the quality of the translation Trump was getting from Putin’s interpreter, she furiously took notes.

After the call, Trump told Tillerson and McMaster that he wasn’t happy with the pre-written press statement about the call, and he started dictating revisions. Hill wasn’t paying attention. “I thought we’d have a substantive discussion about the call,” she told me. “I thought my job was to say, ‘Well, this is what happened. Perhaps we need to think about this.’ ”

She noticed that Trump was looking in her direction and asking, “Can she do it?” Hill told me, “I’m thinking, Can she do what? My head is pounding. I’m thinking, What happened? She? No, not Margaret, not Ivanka. Huh. It must be me. I looked like a deer in the headlights. And the President said, ‘Hey, darling, are you listening?’ ” Hill suspected that Trump thought she was a secretary. McMaster handed Hill a piece of paper with Trump’s revisions, but Hill didn’t know what it was. “Nobody threw me a lifeline,” she recalled. “Nobody said, ‘Oh, this is Fiona.’ ” Hill got up and walked into the office of Madeleine Westerhout, Trump’s executive assistant. McMaster rushed in behind her. Hill thought that she should apologize to the President, but McMaster told her, “He’ll think it’s weakness.” Later, Hill learned that Ivanka had thought that she had been rude to her father.

Until that point, Hill said, she had always let her work speak for itself. But she had noticed that women in the West Wing wore designer dresses and more makeup. After the meeting, she went out and bought a few new outfits, “just so I wouldn’t be conspicuous in my dowdiness.” It was well known that Trump put inordinate stock in appearances, particularly when it came to women. “Central casting is a real thing for him,” a longtime Trump adviser told me. Trump addressed his female aides as “honey,” “sweetie,” and “darling.” If he didn’t like how an adviser looked, he would say, “Honey, you look so tired.” Trump would sometimes say of his female advisers, “They look O.K. in person, but on TV they look really bad. Why do they look so bad?”

After Betsy DeVos, the Education Secretary, was interviewed on “60 Minutes,” Trump complained that she wasn’t attractive enough. When officials were discussing the possibility of a new position for Nikki Haley, the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, Trump said he didn’t like how her cheeks looked. He complained to officials that Kirstjen Nielsen, the Secretary of Homeland Security, wasn’t sufficiently aggressive toward migrants—and she was too short. When Trump insulted a female adviser, the men in the room would look away. “It throws you off your game,” a former female adviser told me. “It deflates you.” Another former White House official, a man, told me that Trump was “rougher with women. He has a problem with women.” It was soon evident that Trump had a problem with Hill. “Forgive me, Fiona’s attractive, but he doesn’t trust women that are kind of non-players in his world,” the former official said. He added, “Anyone who takes notes is suspect.” A former national-security official told me that, after the incident in the Oval Office, some of Trump’s top advisers, including Reince Priebus, his chief of staff, began referring to Hill as “the Russia bitch.”

Hill had seen how, during the Bush Administration, advisers to Vice-President Dick Cheney had excluded some of her N.S.C. colleagues from important discussions, believing that they weren’t hawkish enough. Still, she was unprepared for the viciousness of the infighting in the Trump Administration. Leaks to the press were a constant source of acrimony. Stephen K. Bannon, a senior adviser to Trump, along with Derek Harvey, the N.S.C.’s senior director for the Middle East, and Joel Rayburn, a Middle East specialist who worked in Harvey’s directorate, compiled and circulated lists of N.S.C. civil servants whom they wanted removed, suspecting them of being insufficiently committed to Trump’s policies. Bannon had read Hill’s book on Putin—twice, he told me—and said he considered her to be a “consummate professional.” Nevertheless, he had tried to block her appointment. He believed that she would resist the idea of joining forces with Putin to counter China’s influence, and urged Flynn to find someone “a little more malleable on Russia.”

In the spring of 2017, Hill was reviewing Obama’s policies on Europe and Russia. His Administration had shunned the autocratic Hungarian President Viktor Orbán, who was thwarting efforts to build a united front within the E.U. and nato in support of Ukraine. Hill did not oppose a meeting between Trump and Orbán, but she wanted to make sure that Orbán was serious about changing his behavior. On May 23rd, Connie Mack, a former Republican congressman who was working as a lobbyist for Orbán, tried to persuade two of Mike Pence’s foreign-policy advisers to hold a Trump-Orbán summit at the White House. Trump had extended the invitation to Orbán by telephone in 2016; Mack wanted to know why the Obama policy remained in effect.

Mack told me, “It was clear that there was someone above who was saying ‘No meeting,’ and I knew it wasn’t Pence. So I started looking around, poking around, and I came across Fiona Hill’s name.” On the Brookings Web site, Mack discovered that Hill had worked with organizations that had ties to the Budapest-born financier George Soros, who is a frequent target of right-wing groups. Mack told Pence’s advisers that he believed that Hill was responsible for the holdup. According to an official who heard that conversation, Mack accused Hill of doing Soros’s bidding. On May 31st, the political operative Roger Stone, a longtime friend of Trump’s, appeared on Alex Jones’s television show, which traffics in far-right conspiracy theories. Stone told Jones, “This is very hard to believe, but I confirmed the facts again this morning. Soros has planted a mole infiltrating the national-security apparatus—a woman named Fiona Hill.” After the show aired, a woman called Hill’s house, and when her daughter picked up the phone the woman told her that her mother was “a cunt.” Hill started to receive death threats. In June, Mack began circulating a memo, titled “Fiona Hill Backgrounder,” to former congressional colleagues, documenting what he described as Hill’s purported links to “the Soros network.” Soon, one of Mack’s contacts told him that the memo was “in Trump’s hands.”

While many people in Washington believed that Trump’s friendly treatment of Putin was evidence of collusion, Hill saw the behavior as part of a pattern. Trump was equally reluctant to criticize other autocratic leaders, including President Xi Jinping, of China, and President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, of Turkey. He conducted diplomacy with these men the same way he ran his hospitality business, preferring informal, freewheeling conversations. He was happier when aides weren’t present and notes weren’t taken, which left Administration officials scrambling to figure out what, if anything, had been agreed upon. Foreign leaders often tried to take advantage of the distrust between Trump and his advisers. In a May, 2017, meeting with Erdoğan, whom Trump privately referred to as “the Sultan,” Trump made it clear that he disagreed with his military advisers, and didn’t want to provide support to the Kurds. After Erdoğan called him on Thanksgiving Day, presumably hoping to catch him alone on the golf course, Trump joked about having spoken to the President of Turkey on “Turkey Day.” Hill said, “He just wants to go in and shoot the breeze with these guys, because he thinks he’s got great chemistry with them.”



